Draft HardForks.md (#1401)
IntersectMBO/ouroboros-consensus: docs/website/contents/for-developers/ProtocolVersioning.md

> # Introduction

Reviewer: Just a small detail, the outline of this MD document seems wrong, everything is a subsection of the introduction 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e6eecf0c-018e-4919-9d14-9e50be71b772)

> The Cardano protocol will change over time.

Author: GitHub does not allow threading of comments on the PR itself. But we've got a pretty big conversation happening there right now, so I'm going to arbitrarily choose this line in the diff in order to create a thread for that conversation.

---

@lehins wrote:

> We, in ledger, when we change transaction serialization, we try to do it in the most graceful matter possible for any one era transition, in order to make the transition to the new era smooth. The only reason why we would ever want to change serialization during an intra era hard fork would be to patch some bug, which would have no affect on normal legitimate transactions.

and

> This is not always going to be true. The goal is to keep as much backwards compatibility from one era to the next one that follows, but there is no real need to support all eras all the way down to Shelley.

Based on those two quotes, I'm thinking the tacit rule is that: Cardano users should only ever consider the latest protocol version, and maybe the two latest protocol versions when near a hard fork event.

And Alexey is saying that the ledger team tries, for each hard fork event, to minimize the disagreement between those two protocol versions regarding what some bytes might mean as a transaction.

This is a very helpful insight for me; I'll ponder it. I could very much see it simplifying my intuition about what's important here. On the other hand, there is some appeal in the user explicit declaring their intent through a version, as Alexey elaborated here:

> If there is a desire from users to specify validity for protocol version, maybe we could provide ability for a user to supply an optional range of protocol versions that the transaction should be valid for. Considering such envelope information today wouldn't be signed it would be more of UX improvement/restriction, rather than some sort of guarantee, unless in the future era we make this protocol version range part of the TxBody, similarly to validity interval.

---

Ultimately, the Mempool needs to know the byte size/ExUnits size/ref script size/etc of a tx before validating that tx. And as of UTxO HD it'll need to identify the set of TxIn before validating the tx. Etc. Parsing the tx to project out that data currently requires choosing which era's codec to use.

That's the only reason why "a tx is just bytes" doesn't trivially work for the Mempool with the HFC.

However, maybe that idea remains workable if we store txs "as bytes" even when they're already in the Mempool. That is, whenever the Mempool does anything with a tx (eg measure its sizes, revalidate it, etc) it applies the codec for the era (/protocol version) of the node's current selection to the tx's bytes --- forgetting any parsing it might have done before (unless the era is the same as last time, eg).

Reviewer 2: > However, maybe that idea remains workable if we store txs "as bytes" even when they're already in the Mempool. 

This is already possible. You can always get the original bytes of any transaction with this [`originalBytes`](https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-ledger/blob/81637a1c2250225fef47399dd56f80d87384df32/libs/cardano-ledger-core/src/Cardano/Ledger/Hashes.hs#L372) function if you ever need to re-deserialize it another era.

The community innovates applications and updates feature priorities, researchers refine Ouroboros, and developers improve the code.

This document describes how Cardano accomodates these changes as a community, as a software engineering project, and as a distributed system.

## The Protocol Version

> Each change to the Cardano protocol advances through the following steps before influencing the network's chain.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure "influencing" is the right term.

```suggestion
Each change to the Cardano protocol advances through the following steps before impacting the network's blockchain.
```

- Someone (you!) specifies a change that is backwards-incompatible but worthwhile.
  For example, it could be a [Cardano Improvement Proposal](https://cips.cardano.org/) (CIP).
- The Technical Steering Committee and Ouroboros researchers address the worth, safety, and future consequences of the proposed solution.
- Cardano developers prepare a software release that includes the changes but only enables them for chains on which the protocol version has been incremented.
- The community uses on-chain governance to increment the protocol version, thereby putting the change into effect.

>   (Stake pool operators must not vote to increment the protocol version before updating their software!)

Reviewer 3: Is it sufficiently clear for the reader which protocol version increment we're referring to? I guess this refers to the protocol version included in the headers, which denotes the maximum protocol version our node supports.

Cardano philosophy mandates that the community has the final say regarding if and when to adopt some protocol change.
They accordingly control the final step above: developers determine the exact meaning of each protocol version, but only the community increments the protocol version on mainnet.

It is crucial that the community does not increment the protocol version before enough nodes have upgraded their software.
Each protocol version increment corresponds to a _hard fork_, because the changes are backwards-incompatible: nodes running the old code will not be able to adopt blocks minted by the new code.

> Even if some block content happened to be valid in both the old and the new protocol, each software release explicitly refuses any block that (extends a ledger state that) has a protocol version greater than that release was intended to implement — see the MaxMajorPV constant.

Reviewer 3: Is it worth adding a link to the location where `MaxMajorPV` is defined?

Even software released well after mainnet increments the protocol version must implement the protocol both with and without that increment's changes.
The Cardano node must correctly process blocks with older protocol versions, eg when catching up to mainnet for the first time or after being offline for a long time.

> So every protocol change must remain conditional within all future releases, instead of only within the particular release that mainnet used for that increment of the protocol version.

Reviewer 3: What does it mean for a protocol change to be conditional on a (future) release?

- *Chain Validity Predicates*, the validity predicates within the Message Validity Rung for block headers and blocks.
- *Chain Order*, the [partial order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partially_ordered_set) within the Message Validity Rung that determines one chain is better than another.
  Tiebreakers are a gray area, since Praos does not inherently rely on them.
- *Chain Data Model*, the parts of the Message Data Rung used to define the Chain Validity Predicates and the Chain Order.
    - A change to the data model of the node's maintained state --- as opposed to its messages --- would not inherently trigger this.
    - However, if such a change were meaningful (ie not just a refactor/optimization/etc), then some Chain Validity Predicates would necessarily also change.
- *Chain Codecs*, the parts of the mapping from the CBOR Rung to the Chain Data Model that affect the hashes therein.
  Two nodes won't even be able to exchange transactions, block headers, and/or blocks if they disagree on their identifying hashes.

The most common change in Cardano's protocol so far has been the addition of a new kind/variant of transaction, which triggers all of these except the Chain Order.

> The Chain Order has only changed from Praos's length to Ouroboros Genesis's length-soon-after-the-intersection, which is slight.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Chain Order has only changed from Praos's length to Ouroboros Genesis's density-after-the-intersection, which is slight.
```

I would not relate Genesis and length artificially. Genesis is about density.

Author: I'm hung up on this a little, since `length-soon-after-the-intersection` _is_ density, assuming "soon" is a fixed value.

It's also worth noting that the Consensus Layer and Network Layer of the Message Data Rung can change without incrementing the protocol version.
The most common example is that queries can be changed without triggering any of the above, since queries do not contain any of the Chain Data Model.
Another example is that the structure of the Consensus envelope could change.
Or the mini protocols --- excluding their payload --- could change.
All such changes are conditional on the per-connection version negotiated by the Handshake mini protocol instead of the protocol version.

## Ledger Eras

Any Cardano node implemented in a strongly-typed language is likely going to declare distinct types for Chain Data Models that differ between protocol versions; more precise types yield stronger assurances from the typechecker.
For the sake of such implementations, the ledger introduces a new era whenever the Chain Data Model changes.
The [sequence of eras](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/blob/master/CIP-0059/feature-table.md) at the time of writing are: Byron [^byron-halves], Shelley, Allegra, Mary, Alonzo, Babbage, and Conway.

> A Cardano node implementation or other tooling implemented in a language prone to dynamic typing might find it convenient to ignore the era tags for the most part.

Reviewer: I appreciate the distinction between strongly-typed nodes and other nodes. Perhaps this could end up in the Blueprint

Author: Great to hear! The blueprint is certainly in the back of my mind as I'm writing this document.
